I'm Barry Rholtz. You're listening to
Masters in Business on Bloomberg Radio.
Today I have an extra extra special
guest. His name is Neil Kadiel. He is
the former solicitor general of the
United States for the Obama
administration. He is a legendary
appellet attorney. He has argued more
cases in front of the Supreme Court than
I want to say any living uh attorney
these days. He's currently a partner at
Milbank uh where he's a member of the
firm's litigation and arbitration group.
He pretty much has won every award there
is to win as an appellet litigator. He
is a recipient of the highest civilian
award by the US Department of Justice.
Uh the chief justice of the Supreme
Court appointed him multiple times to
the advisory committee on federal
appellet rules. He's been named
litigator of the year, top 50 lawyers,
most influential lawyers in DC. On and
on it goes. Rather than just read you
his CV, let me say Neil Kial, welcome to
Bloomberg.
>> Thank you. It's a pleasure to be with
you.
>> Well, it's a pleasure to have you. You
couldn't possibly be more relevant to
this moment in time with what's going on
in terms of policy and politics and
juristprudence. But before we get to
that, let let's spend a little time just
talking about your background and
career, Dartmouth undergrad, uh JD from
Yale. What was the original career plan?
>> Uh the original plan was for me to be a
professor of history and um yeah, I had
gone I went to Dartmouth College as you
noted. I probably was one of the last
kids admitted to Dartmouth. I was not a
particularly great high school student.
And I had this professor Doug Haynes in
history at Dartmouth who basically
taught me to write and taught me how to
think. And I was so grateful to him and
I felt like I should do that with my
life is go and give back in the way that
Doug had given me this incredible gift.
And so in my senior year, I say to Doug,
I was like, you know, I ask him to have
lunch with me and I say, I'd really like
to be a history professor. And um and
you know, frankly, you're the one who
inspired me and I want to do this. And
he thought about it and he said,
"Honestly,
um Neil, I don't think you should be a
history professor because it's really
tough and it's hard to get tenure and
you'll have to start in some, you know,
small town in the middle of nowhere.
It's hard to meet a spouse and so on."
He said, 'Look, you're you're at that
point I was a national champion debater.
And he said, "My advice to you is to go
to law school." And in particular, he
said, "Go to Yale Law School, which is
known for creating law professors, and
you can do all the same stuff you want
to do, but as a law professor, where you
would get paid three times, it's easier
to get tenure. Um, your life is a lot
easier." So, I did that. I applied to
Yale Law School. I got in again,
probably one of the last kids admitted.
Um, and at the law school, I had these
incredible professors who did the same
thing that Doug Haynes did for me in
history in other areas, constitutional
law and uh, criminal law and the like,
and these incredible professors who
taught me again how to think and how to
write. And so I was committed to being a
law professor. I um uh clerked first for
Guido Calibrazy who was the dean of the
Yale law school was put on the court of
appeals and then for Justice Steven
Brier. Um but all through that time I
knew I wanted to be a law professor. So
I applied while I was clerking to teach
and at the age of I think 26 years old I
took a job teaching at Georgetown Law
and that was the plan for my life to be
a law professor and nothing but a law
professor.
>> And do you still do any teaching these
days? I do and I love I love it and in
many ways it's my favorite job I've ever
had. But um there's a lot else going on
in the world these days and so um you
know it was a little bit by accident
that I fell into this litigation thing.
Yes, I was a national champion debater
and so I was comfortable being on my
feet, but I was really, you know,
dominating my dominant thinking was be a
law professor, write these theoretical
articles that change the way people
think about the law and teach students.
So that's what I thought I was going to
do. Um, and then something happened
which was um, uh, we had the horrific
attacks on September 11th
>> and I was bumbling around trying to
figure out what to do. I was teaching at
Yale Law School that year and um uh and
you know my students and I we decided to
try and help first responders get
benefits and stuff and you know we
weren't particularly good at it but it
was something and then President Bush
announced that he was going to have
these military trials at Guantanamo Bay
for suspected terrorists and I looked at
that. I had served in the Justice
Department briefly and and we had the
embassy bombings of al-Qaeda at the
time. And so I looked into could we have
military trials and we concluded they
were obviously unconstitutional. So I
went and looked up what's President Bush
doing here? What's a source of authority
for this? And you know it wasn't
particularly compelling. In fact, it was
really weak. And because the president
was saying he was going to set up these
trials from scratch. who's going to pick
the prosecutors, pick the defense
attorneys, write all the rules for the
criminal trials, uh define the
punishments and offenses, including the
death even handed and fair. What's your
objection?
>> Yeah. And you know, even the last lines
of the executive order said, "The courts
have no business reviewing what I'm
doing, the no rid of habius corpus." So,
I went into my constitutional law class
and said, "You guys always tease me
because I think the president should
have such strong powers and nothing the
president does is unconstitutional."
Well, here's something that's obviously
unconstitutional.
And in the class was a senator was a
staffer for Senator Ley who was then the
chair of the Senate Judiciary Committee.
And so she told him about me and he had
a hearing and I testified and said,
"Look, I don't know if you want to have
these military trials or not, but the
one thing I'm sure of is that it can't
be done with the president's stroke of
his pen. You need Congress to approve
it." And this is of course going to be
relevant as we talk about tariffs um
later. It's the exact same architecture
of the argument. And so that's how I
testified. Nobody listened. So then I go
and I write a law reviewview article
with Lawrence Tribe, the nation's most
most preeminent constitutional
>> law. So you Lawrence at a tribe at
Harvard.
>> Yeah. Exactly. And so we write this
article in the Yale Law Journal. We
erase it to print saying what's going on
is unconstitutional. Nobody reads the
article. My mom maybe my mom read it,
but you know, I don't know. Um, so then
I said to myself, you know, you've got
this piece of paper, Neil, a law degree.
You could actually sue the president.
And
>> you're a plaintiff, though, don't you?
>> Exactly. So that was the hard question
because a bunch of different interest
groups had sued on Guantanamo, but they
didn't have standing. They had no
reason. And so I had a friend very high
up at the Pentagon who got me the email
address of a Pentagon lawyer who was
representing the detainees. and I
basically got a letter snuck to
Guantanamo and it wound up in the hands
of uh Osama bin Laden's driver and um
and that became my client. And so I go
from being a theoretical law professor
to like a real like hard-nosed litigator
all in the span of a few months. Um I
file the case. Nobody thinks we're going
to win. I have
>> How far are you from law school now?
>> I'm like six years out.
>> So still relatively green.
>> Yeah, very green. and never filed a
lawsuit, you know, and so and I, by the
way, I don't have any help except four
law students who were helping me. Um, I
tried with law firms and initially I
couldn't get them, but then ultimately
Perkins Kuey, a Seattle firm, uh,
decided to help me and that was
phenomenal. So, we filed this thing.
Nobody thinks we're going to win and we
win it in the trial court. We lose it in
the Court of Appeals with a guy named
John Roberts on the desit panel. Three
days later, he's nominated to the
Supreme Court and then to the Chief
Justiceship. So, I have to ask the
Supreme Court to hear this Guantanamo
case. It's the most important case their
new chief justice has ever decided. Um,
and I'm going to say I'm trying to tell
the Supreme Court, the Chief Justice is
wrong about this. Nobody thinks we're
going to win. It's my first Supreme
Court argument. I'm arguing against
President Bush's legendary solicitor
general. It's his 35th argument. I work
my tail off and we win. And then my life
changes and then companies want to hire
me and I meet a young senator named
Barack Obama who heard me interviewed on
a interview just like this one. Um and
he calls me into the Senate and says,
you know, asks me to advise him on some
things on Guantanamo and tells me he's
thinking of running for president and um
and then started working with him and
then my life changes massively.
>> Wow. That that's amazing. You know, I
want to talk about a couple of the other
cases that you argued. Uh, one was Moore
versus Harper, which former judge
Michael Ludd called the most important
case for American democracy ever. Tell
us about that case.
>> Yeah, so that's a pretty recent one. I
argued it, I think about three years
ago, and it involved something called
the independent state legislature
theory, which at that point was the
greatest threat to democracy, I think,
when um when Judge Ludig was writing
those remarks. Um, we've now had some
things which, you know, are arguably
worse. Um, but it was a significant one
because if you think back to the 2020
election, one of the things that that
President Trump tried to do then was to
say that state legislatures can control
elections. And you can even throw out
the popular vote and just have state
legislators
uh decide where the electoral votes will
go to who which candidate. And this
became part of the RNC's playbook. and
they invested heavily in state
legislatures to try and develop
excuse me this theory. So,
um we challenged that. Again, this is
one in which nobody thought we could win
because if um if the Republicans won,
they would entrench control over
presidential elections for decades
probably. And a lot of people think, oh,
this Supreme Court, they're appointed by
Republicans. They're very conservative.
they're just going to do the Republican
party's bidding. And I looked at it and
I said, I don't think that's right. I
mean, this is a court that does have
fidelity to the original understanding
of the Constitution. And I thought if we
could make the argument in that way, and
this is what my scholarship is all
about, the original understanding of the
Constitution, I said I thought we could
win. And so that's what I developed as
the strategy. Um, and indeed I knew that
Justice Thomas, Clarence Thomas, would
ask the first question at oral argument.
That's been happening now for the last
few years.
>> Ju just out of habit or like how does
that
>> Well, he's one of the more senior
justices and um during co um when we had
to argue cases on speaker phones and we
couldn't see each other, it went in
order of seniority and so Justice Thomas
was right at the top. um after COVID
that tradition continued in which
Justice Thomas would ask the first
question. And so I'd been thinking, how
do I use that knowledge to my advantage?
Justice Thomas is going to ask the first
question. And what I did was I said to
myself, okay, I can develop a set play.
Justice Thomas is going to ask me a
question. Doesn't matter what the
question is. I'm then going to say, and
this is what I do. Justice Thomas asked
me a question at the argument. I don't
remember what the question was. Um, I
answer it and then I say, "Justice
Thomas, may I say in nearly three
decades of arguing before you, I've been
waiting for this case because it speaks
to your method of constitutional
interpretation, the original
understanding, and here are the four
things you need to know about Moore
versus Harper and the original
understanding of the Constitution." And
I get to talk about Madison and Hamilton
and Jefferson and so on. And it totally
changes the dynamic in the courtroom.
and and sure enough, we win 6 to3. Um,
this case in the Republican theory is
thrown out. Uh, I didn't win Justice
Thomas's vote, but I won a bunch of
others.
>> Huh. That that's amazing. Let's let's
quickly talk about the Voting Rights Act
that you successfully defended instead
of trying to overturn it. Tell us how
different it is to be playing defense or
is it not? you're just arguing
constitution and law and this is the
outcome that should come about.
>> Um it is different but I would say even
back then I was felt like I was playing
defense. So this is a case I argued in
maybe 2010. Um the voting rights act
have been passed in 1965. It literally
has the blood of patriots on it. It is
what Selma and the bridge pate bridge is
all about. And um so um you know in the
case basically it was right after
President Obama had been elected and
southern states said look we don't need
the Voting Rights Act anymore. Look you
have an African-American president. Like
that's proof that we don't need it. And
um I stood up in court and said no we do
need it. And it's like you know the very
fact that we've been able to have an
African-American president isn't alone
enough to to say there isn't
discrimination in voting. particularly
in particular areas, you know, even if
the overall national result is one
thing. And the Supreme Court at that
point accepted that argument. Um, in
four years later, however, in a case
called Shelby County, they reversed that
position and struck down that part of
the Voting Rights Act. And now there's
only one part of the Voting Rights Act
that remains, section two. And the
Supreme Court's agreed to hear a case to
challenge that this fall. And so we very
well may have a world in which there is
no voting rights act left whatsoever
which is a very dangerous thing. And yes
I do think the court has become more
conservative over my lifetime. I mean
the court has always been appoint
majority Republican appointees since
>> this isn't just partisanship. This is
ideological tilt not necessarily party
tilts.
>> Yeah. So I would say you know that the
presidents now of both parties are
sending to the Supreme Court more sure
things
>> um that uh you know in which the track
record is really known. You know the
Republicans had this mantra no more
suitors because David Sudter nominated
by Republican President Bush upheld
things like abortion rights and so on.
And the Democrats I think have had their
own version of this for some time as
well. And so we get we don't tend to get
justices without very defined positions
anymore. Like when I started arguing,
Justice Kennedy was on the court. And
you could see Barry, every time you
argued, he was struggling with which is
the right view, which is the right view
of the law. And he's a very smart man.
It wasn't that he wasn't smart. When I
say struggling, it's not that he was
struggling intellectually. They were
pretty even-handed arguments on both
sides. really took the arguments so
seriously without caricaturing them and
just tried to make the right decision.
And certainly that still happens today.
I don't mean to overclaim it, but I
would say in particularly some of the
big cases, they're coming in a bit more
with their minds made up than uh than
when I first started.
>> After we recorded our conversation, a
federal's appeals court ruled on Friday
that many of President Trump's most
punishing tariffs were illegal. Neil and
I spoke again after that ruling. Uh he
represented the small businesses that
brought the case. First off, Neil,
congratulations. You just won a major
appellet case in VOS elections versus
Donald Trump. So, congrats.
>> Thank you so much. Um yeah, I think I
saw you and we had our interview the day
before the decision came down. The way
the court of appeals works, like the US
Supreme Court, they never tell you in
advance when a decision's coming down.
And indeed, it was a little, I think,
past 5:00 on Friday, right before Labor
Day, and I was about to leave the
office, and then I heard my email ding,
and I look at it, and I'm like, well, I
might as well see what this is. I
assumed it was just some, you know,
minor thing, and I'm like, whoa, it's
the decision. And, you know, Barry, they
let me know the decision at the very
same time. they let the world know
because otherwise if they let me know in
advance, you know, that's private
information. This is the kind of
information that does move markets and
so they let the entire world know,
including me, at the the very same time.
>> So, so let's put this into a little
timeline. We had our recording um
Wednesday, August 27th. The decision
decision dropped around five o'clock on
Friday, August 29th. Today is Sunday,
August 31st. Everybody else is on the
beach. Um I know you're leaving for
Europe in in a couple of days, but I
wanted to just touch base with you and
try and figure out where this goes from
here. So So let's start out with the
decision. I thought the majority
decision 74
um uh your way. I thought it was a
pretty powerful reputation of the
executives's ability to just impose
tariffs. I don't want to say on a whim,
but lacking the specific following of
the AEIPA rules and what an emergency
actually is. Can can you address that a
little bit? Yeah, I think that the seven
judges in the majority were uh saying
exactly what we've said all along, which
is maybe these tariffs are a good idea,
maybe they're a bad idea, but they can't
be imposed by the president's pen alone.
You got to go to Congress and get that
authorization. That that's our
constitutional system. And what the
seven judges said is that's exactly
right, that the Congress has never given
the president such a sweeping power to
just do it on his own. And if they did,
they said it'd be unconstitutional. But
they said that isn't what's going on
here. And the president has an easy fix.
If he wants to, he could go to Congress
and seek approval for the tariffs that
he wants. That's what he did the first
time around. And as we talked about last
week, you know, that's something that
failed in Congress. And so I maybe
that's why he doesn't want to do it.
Obviously, these tariffs are highly
unpopular. But nonetheless, you know,
the Congress is controlled by his party.
Um, and you know, that's the place to
start. Don't run to the federal courts
to do what you can't do in Congress.
>> So, I want to talk about the disscent in
a bit, but let's just talk about what
the appellet court did. Um, which I was
somewhat confused by. Maybe you can
clarify this. They remand it back to the
International Court of Trade in DC,
which is a US uh court for findings
about who this applies to. Like it seems
sort of odd to say, well, it only might
apply to the litigants. What are we
going to have 7 million cases on this
tariffs? It it would seem that either
it's constitutional or unconstitutional
and that applies to everybody or am I
being naive?
>> I think that's basically right, Barry,
that I think ultimately the question is,
are these tariffs legal or illegal? If,
as the court of appeals said, they're
illegal, then the vast vast majority of
Trump's tariffs are unconstitutional,
illegal, can't be imposed, and people
who've been had them imposed, you know,
may have remedies and recourses. Um what
the court also did though and you're
referring to a fairly technical part of
the decision is it sent it case back to
the lower court to evaluate the scope of
the remedies and that's because the US
Supreme Court just very recently in the
birthright citizenship case has
announced some new ways of thinking
about relief on parties and particular
in class actions and things like that.
And so I think the court federal circuit
did the prudent thing here by just
saying with respect to that I'd like the
we'd like the lower court to evaluate
it. I think that's pretty much a
sideshow at this point. My strong hunch
is that the federal government has a
strong interest in resolving this
question. After all this is a really you
know an initiative of President Trump's
that's been declared unconstitutional.
So I think they're going to go to the
Supreme Court. I mean again I wish that
weren't the case. I wish they'd go to
Congress, which is the way that our
constitution commands things, but it,
you know, according to the president's
tweets and the like, they want to go to
the Supreme Court.
>> So, what is the process like for this to
go up to Scotas? Uh, first, the remand
back to the district court, not
relevant. That's just a very specific um
uh remedy question. Uh uh assuming the
petition for cersiari is is filed by the
government um what what are the options?
What might the Supreme Court do?
>> Yeah. So I think you're right to say
that the the lower court proceedings on
relief are irrelevant here. Indeed, the
federal circuit said that that lower
court has no role um at least until
October 14th because they wanted to give
the government time to file what's
called a petition for Cersei which is a
formal request to the US Supreme Court
to hear the case. Um the government is
saying that in these tweets by president
the president and others that they will
file that petition for cerseiary ask the
supreme court to hear the case and then
it's obviously up to the supreme court
to decide statistically when the
government asks them to hear a case
particularly in you know one that has
important consequences the the court
does hear the case. So, uh, the court
very well may set the case for oral
argument and then there'll be the
argument from the two sides as to
whether or not this lower court decision
that we won, um, declaring President
Trump's terrorists unconstitutional,
whether that will be upheld by the US
Supreme Court. So, I was kind of
intrigued by the dissents
um which
I'm not a practicing attorney anymore,
so I'm not up todate in in what is the
latest thinking in terms of art, but it
sort of seemed like one of the the
dissents suggested
that it's an emergency if the president
declares it an emergency. Kind of makes
that word meaningless. H how did you
read the significance of the dissent and
what might it mean to to the hearing if
this ultimately goes to the Supreme
Court?
>> I think that's exactly right um what
you're saying which is if the descent
were right it basically reads the word
emergency out of the statute. It gives
cart blanch deference to the president
and the Supreme Court in an earlier case
back in 1911 said you can't do that with
the word emergency. And here I think
Barry the other really important point
is that the law that the president is
citing AIPA doesn't just talk about
emergency. It requires it to be unusual
and extraordinary. And the president's
own executive order when he imposed
these tariffs said that the trade
deficits were persistent and gone on for
50 years. They're the opposite of
unusual and extraordinary. And look, of
course, you want the president in a
genuine true emergency that's unusual
and extraordinary to have extra powers
because if Congress can't meet to, you
know, repel some threat or something
like that, you want the president to
have some gap filling power. This is the
opposite of that. I mean, Congress is in
session. They're passing bill after bill
and the like. And of course, they're
controlled by the same political party
as the president. So the idea that
Congress can't act is, you know, to use
the technical legal term poppycock.
>> All right. So, um, let's let's broaden
this out a little bit. Um, I think this
is an important case because I'm a
market participant and
tariffs are a tax. They're a headwind to
consumer spending and other economic
activities. But stepping back and
looking at this from a constitutional
standard, how much of this is focusing
on how much authority the executive
branch of the US government has? I is
this a um an attempt to rebalance the
the the three parts of government by
this particular president or is this
just no, we want our tariffs and we want
to stop all these bad things that uh the
tariffs will cure.
>> Yeah. I view this decision not as a
rebalancing of our constitutional
separation of powers, but rather a
return to what our founders original
concept was, which was Congress makes
the laws, the president enforces them,
the courts decide whether those laws are
legal or not. And here what happened is
you had a president who colored well
outside of the lines um and you know
asserted an extraordinary power that no
president in American history has ever
asserted on his own. And I think the
court is doing here what the courts have
done time in memorial in other cases.
Whether it was the seizure of the steel
mills by President Truman in 1952,
whether it was President Bush's lawfree
zone at Guantanamo after the horrific
9/11 attacks, whether it was, you know,
President Biden's student loan
initiative programs. In all of these
cases, you've had presidents that try
and assert muscular powers and the court
pushes back on them. And this is, I
think, a pretty extreme illustration of
a president who's asserting powers that
he has no business asserting.
>> So, at um at the appellet level, it was
74. The descent was written by a justice
appointed by President Obama. It's kind
of a little bit surprising to me. Um,
when you look at the lay of the Supreme
Court, I know a lot of people tend to
look at that as Democrats versus
Republicans, but the appellet attorneys
I know and the people who are
constitutional
lawyers tend to look at it as
originalists versus more modern
interpreters. How are you looking at
this case when it gets assuming it goes
up to the Supreme Court? How are you
looking at the context of this case?
>> I I love the question because, you know,
oftentimes people say things like,
"Well, the Supreme Court is appointed by
Republicans, so they only wrote
Republican or nonsense like that."
That's just not my experience. I mean,
I've been lucky to argue 52 cases there.
And I just don't see it in the same way
as those kind of pundits see it. And,
you know, I think you're right to say
the decision by the 7 to4 courts a good
illustration of that. the descent
written by a judge who was appointed by
a Democratic president. Our majority
opinion, the senior most judge in the
majority is Judge Lori who was appointed
by President Bush um but says that these
terrorists are unconstitutional. So I
don't think it's the right way to think
about it. I think that there are people
who take constitutional limits more
seriously and others who want to defer
and avoid getting the courts in the
middle of something. And so maybe that's
one axis that sometimes could be used to
predict outcomes. But here I think no
matter which way you look at it, the
president just doesn't have this power.
Um, you know, we might wish he had this
power. It might be a good idea for him
to have this power, but our founders
were as clear as day in article 1
section 8. They said specifically that
power over duties is one given to the
congress, not to the president.
>> So there are a couple of key issues.
this is going to turn on the
constitutionality article 1 section 8 um
the IEPA laws and what is an emergency
any other factors that might drive this
that um we should be aware of yeah I
think there's a couple one is that the
Supreme Court in recent years has
announced something called the major
questions doctrine and the idea of that
doctrine is to say if Congress is giving
the president some sort of power they
don't hide it in vague terms They say it
really expressly and clearly. Um, you
know, Justice Scalia's phrase is that
Congress doesn't hide elephants and
mouse holes. And at the oral argument, I
took that even further. I said, you
know, this isn't just an elephant in a
mouse hole. It's a galaxy and a keyhole.
It's an extraordinary set of powers
given to the president um that claimed
by the president. And you know this
doctrine major questions doctrine has
been used Barry by the US Supreme Court
repeatedly to strike down President
Biden's initiatives whether it's over
greenhouse gases or whether it's over
student loans or whether it was over
COVID v eviction moratoriums and things
like that. And I think that you know
what the majority said in this opinion
that we won just a couple days ago is
hey what sauce for the goose is sauce
for the gander. this applies to other
presidential initiatives and including
of course this one here and that it
would be a violation of the major
questions doctrine for Congress to have
not even used the word tariff or duty or
anything like that in IPA and then to
have a president come along and say ha I
can now do whatever I want.
>> So let's let's expand this a bit. Um,
how creative was it of the
administration to try and get tariffs
imposed under AIPA? Is this something
that's just wildly outside of what AIPA
originally was designed about?
>> 100%. Nobody, and I've read the
legislative history behind AIPA, s very
carefully, nobody thought that this was
about the tariff power. And so, um, yes,
they get a A+ plus for creativity, the
Trump administration, in coming up with
an argument that not only no one in
Congress thought, no president for 50
years has thought. Now, creativity only
gets you so far because you have to be
at least somewhat faithful and accurate
to the original text and meaning of the
law. And he that's where I think
unfortunately they get an F and they
fall down on the job. So, I have a
pretty solid recollection of of sitting
in constitutional law classes and
occasionally seeing a decision that was
just perplexing. Although, when you're
looking at something that's a century
old, a Dread Scott or uh separate but
equal type of decision, obviously you're
bringing a modern perspective. It's very
hard to see outside of that. I had the
same you and I spoke before we had the
decision come down. I was kind of
perplexed that this was even like a
debate. It seems pretty obvious none of
the normal rules for enacting tariffs,
none of the procedures, policies um or
allocation of powers amongst uh branches
of government was was followed. So what
do you imagine the government's argument
is going to be at the Supreme Court
level?
>> Right. So Barry, I think the secret
about Supreme Court and presidential
power advocacy is this. I mean, no
matter how creative and ridiculous the
argument is. If the president voices it,
it's a court case and it's going to be
taken seriously by everyone because it's
after all the president. And that's why,
you know, when I was the president's top
lawyer, courtroom lawyer, I was very
careful to only make the arguments that
I thought had very strong basis behind
them because you don't want to diminish
that credibility that the government has
with the US Supreme Court. um here I do
think that the arguments are quite a
stretch for the administration to be
making and I think um you know that's
what you saw reflected in the 7 to4
opinion. So what do I think that the
solicitor general is going to say to the
Supreme Court? I think he's going to say
what he's been saying all along. The
president says he needs this power. It'd
be dangerous to unwind all of these
deals and present it as a fedome plea.
Um, and I just think that's the wrong
way to think about constitutional law.
Um, to allow a president to do what he
wants in the interim and then say, "Oh,
it'd be too dangerous to unwind it." Um,
you know, I think it's better to get the
constitutional rules right the first
time. So, some of the arguments I've
seen from the administration is not only
are the tariffs complicated and we've
spent all this time and effort
negotiating them, which this would
negate, but it would be a negative for
the global economy. You will cause
economic uh distress around the world if
you throw these tariffs out. Seems like
seems like a little bit of a histrionic
claim.
>> Well, I have two things to say about
that. And you know, and you know, we can
defer to the president about whether the
claim is right or wrong, whether it's
histrionic or the like. Let's just say
it's right. Two things. One, if that's
right, it walks right into the
constitutional problem, which is the
major questions doctrine, right? If the
administration is saying, oh, the
economy is going to collapse without
these things. That's exactly the kind of
major question that you think Congress
has to decide, not the president. Number
one. And number two, if it isn't
histrionic, if it's really right that
the economy is going to collapse, then
it's the easiest thing in the world for
the president to go to Congress and seek
authorization. I mean, I don't think the
Congress wants the US economy to
collapse. And there, of course, members
of his own political party that are
running Congress. So, um, there's not
even a politics barrier or anything like
that.
>> Thank you, Neil, for being so generous
with your time. We have been speaking
with Neil Kadial. He is the appellet
litigator for VO selections versus
Trump, which seeks to declare the
president's tariffs not only null and
void, but unconstitutional.
If you enjoy this conversation, well,
check out any of the other 500 we've
done over the past 12 years. You can
find those at iTunes, Spotify,
Bloomberg, uh YouTube, wherever you find
your favorite podcasts. I would be
remiss if I did not thank the crack team
that helps us put these conversations
together each week. Alexis Norieger is
my producer. Sage Bowman is the head of
podcasts at Bloomberg. Shawn Russo is my
researcher. I'm Barry Rholz. You've been
listening to Masters in Business on
Bloomberg Radio.
[Music]